FAQs on Income Tax Slab
Who makes changes to the income tax slabs in India?
The changes to the income tax slabs in India are proposed by the Finance Ministry of India.

When are the changes to the income tax slabs in India proposed?
The changes to the income tax slabs in India are announced by the finance minister of the country. This proposal is usually made when the annual budget is announced every year in the month of February.

Who should prefer new tax regime?
If your tax deductions total less than Rs.3.75 lakh and you earn Rs.20 lakh, the new system will benefit you. Otherwise, choose the previous tax system.

How Rs.7 lakh income is tax free?
From FY 2023–2024, the Section 87A tax rebate cap has been raised. You will be qualified for a tax rebate of Rs.25,000 on income up to Rs.7 lakh if you pick the new tax system. Previously, this was set at Rs.12,500 for income up to Rs.5 lakh.

What is the disadvantage of new tax regime?
There are fewer exemptions and deductions available under the new tax system. Only a select handful are available, such as the standard deduction, leave travel reimbursement, and tax-free Provident Fund withdrawals.

Who can claim rebate under Section 87A?
Rebate under Section 87A can be claimed by any resident Indian whose total annual income up to Rs.7 lakh as per the new regime.

Which tax regime is better for Rs.5 lakh salary?
The tax deduction is 5% for both the regimes if your annual salary is Rs.5 lakh. Have a look at the investments you have made and the ways in which you would like to have tax exemptions based on which you can decide which tax regime will be suitable for you.

Which tax regime is better for Rs.15 lakh?
The standard deduction is 30% for both tax regimes. However, if you have investments through which you would like to enjoy tax exemptions then opt for the old tax regime otherwise the new tax regime will work.

Which tax regime is better for Rs.12 lakh p.a.?
Under the old tax regime, the tax deduction is 30% while for the new tax regime it is 15%. However, based on your investments and other tax saving procedures take a call to see which of the two regimes are suitable for you. If you don’t have any investments, then opt for the new tax regime, otherwise choose the old tax regime.

Are there separate income slab rates for different categories?
Yes, there are separate income slab rates for different income categories such as income below Rs.2.50 lakh, more than Rs.2.50 lakh, and more than Rs.5 lakh has applicable tax rate of zero, 5.00%, and 10%.

What is the new regime of income tax?
The new tax regime was introduced in 2020 where various concessions are included and tax rates have been altered under this new tax regime.

Is 80C available in the new tax regime?
No, 80C deduction is not available in the new tax regime which is available only under old tax regime.

Is the standard deduction of Rs.50,000 applicable in the new tax regime?
Yes, a standard deduction of Rs.50,000 is applicable in the new tax regime from the financial year 2023-2024.

Which deductions are not allowed in the new tax regime?
Sections 80C, 80D, 80E, leave travel concession, house rent allowance, interest on home loans (Section 24b), SEZ unit exemption, standard deduction, deduction for entertainment allowance, and various other deductions under Sections 32AD, 33AB, 33ABA, 35AD, and 35CCC are not allowed.

Can I switch the Income tax regime each year?
Yes, you can switch the income tax regime as per requirement every year. The taxpayer can switch the tax regime while filling in the Income Tax Return.

Do I have to mandatorily opt for a new tax regime while filing returns for AY 2023–24?
No, it is not mandatory to opt for a new tax regime while filing returns for financial 2023-2024. Taxpayers have the freedom to select between new and old tax regimes at the beginning of the year, while it can be modified while filing tax returns.

Is the due date for filing an income tax return the same for all taxpayers?
No, the due date for filling income tax returns is not the same for all employees. The due date for individual taxpayers is 31 July of the assessment year.

Who decides the IT slab rates and can they change?
Yes, IT slab rates change and are decided by the government. The change in the IT slab rates for the financial year are first introduced in the budget and presented in the parliament.

Do I need to file Income Tax Return if my annual income is below Rs.3 lakh?
You need not file an ITR if your yearly income is below Rs.3 lakh under new regime but you should file a 'Nil Return' just for the record as there are many cases where you can produce them as proof of your employment. For instance, you can provide your ITR while applying for a loan or passport.

How is the income of a taxpayer classified?
Under Section 14 of the Income Tax Act, the taxpayer's income has been classified under 5 different income heads such as Salaries individuals, Capital gains, Gains/Profits from profession or business,Income from house property, Income from other sources.

Does family pension come under salary income during taxation?
No, family pension will not be taxed under salary income but as 'income from other sources.'

Will my income be taxed if I am an agriculturist?
Any income which is generated from agriculture or its allied activities will not be taxed. However, it will be considered for rate purpose while calculating tax on any non-agricultural income that you may have.

Is income up to Rs.5 lakh tax-free?
No, income up to Rs.5 lakh is not tax-free. However, individuals who earn an income of up to Rs.3 lakh under the new regime do not have to pay tax.

Can I switch the Income Tax regime for my tax filing?
Yes, you can choose to file your income tax returns as per the old regime or the new regime as per your preference.

Are the income tax slabs in India subject to change?
Yes, the income tax slabs in India are subject to changes.

Will there be any standard deductions for the financial year 2023-2024?
Yes, for the financial year 2023-2024, Rs.50,000 will be the standard deduction.

Will there be different tax slabs for various categories?
Depending on the income and age of the individual, the tax slab he/she will fall under will vary.